# VerticalTailDesigner
This script analyzes the effects of vertical tail parameters on aircraft stability.

## How to use the code

The first section of the code lists the flight parameters and wing dimensions. Fill in these constants before performing the vertical tail parameter sweeps.

The second section performs parameter sweeps for the vertical tail area ratio and area. Choose the range you would like to sweep for both parameters and run the section. The code will output a 3D graph that plots the effect of the vertical tail parameters on lift. Choose numerical values for both parameters.

The third section calculates the roll stability of the aircraft. Input the necessary constants, and define the range you'd like to sweep for the vertical tail's height and taper ratio. Run the section and view the results on the aircraft's roll stability.

The Directional Stability section must be completed before moving on to the Yawing Moment section. The yawing moment section uses the results from directional stability to compute moments based on various input parameters.

The Yaw Damping Derivative section and Moments section calculate important stability derivatives and values, which can be checked in the workspace for further analysis.

## Notes on aircraft stability

In order for the aircraft to be stable, the calculated coefficients must fall within a given range. In order to achieve roll static stability, the roll moment coefficient (Cl) must be negative, and the vertical distance between the aerodynamic center of the vertical tail and the center of gravity of the whole aircraft should be positive. When these conditions are met, the aircraft will have roll static stability, meaning that when the aircraft experiences a roll moment, it will produce a restoring moment such that the aircraft will once again tend towards level flight. The main contributing factor to the roll static stability is the wings of the aircraft. This is because when the airplane is disturbed, it creates a sideslip, and one wing experiences a higher angle of attack and therefore a higher lift, while the other wing experiences a lower angle of attack and therefore a lower lift. This creates a rolling moment that must be countered. It is mostly countered by the wing dihedral with what is known as the dihedral effect. The wing sweep can also change how an aircraft responds to a rolling moment. The aileron, located on the wings of an aircraft, is the main control surface for roll static stability. Though the wing is the main contributor to the roll static stability, it is important that all components of the aircraft work towards establishing stability. It is for this reason that the vertical tail must also have a negative roll moment coefficient. When added together to the contribution of the wings, the roll moment coefficient can be multiplied with flight and plane parameters to get a total restorative rolling moment that can be produced by the aircraft.

The yawing moment is coupled with an aircraft’s directional stability. This is because the directional stability derivative measures how the yawing moment changes with sideslip angles. The directional static stability derivative should act to return the aircraft to level flying conditions (work to reduce the sideslip angle to zero) when it encounters a positive or negative sideslip angle. If this is the case, then the aircraft will have directional stability. Directional stability is the aircraft’s static stability about the yaw axis. When the directional static stability coefficient is positive, the aircraft will have static stability. Different parts of the aircraft will contribute to the total value of the directional stability coefficient (Cn). The wing of the aircraft typically does not contribute to the total value as compared to the fuselage. For our purposes, we ignored the effects and contributions of the engine and horizontal tail. The vertical tail must be designed in such a way that when the aircraft experiences a sideslip angle, the plane will rotate in such a way to ensure directional stability.

The yaw damping derivative is also important in determining the stability about the yaw axis. The yaw damping derivative determines the damping experienced while the vertical tail works to reduce the sideslip angle to zero. Therefore, a positive yaw damping derivative indicates dynamic directional stability. The rudder is also important in ensuring directional stability. The rudder is a control surface located on the vertical tail. The rudder is rotated on the yaw axis to create a yawing moment and help the aircraft move to a zero-sideslip angle. The rudder can only have a certain degree of deflection. This is where the rudder effectiveness becomes important. The rudder control power measures how effective the rudder is at producing a yawing moment. The rudder control power should be negative. As such, it is important to properly design both your vertical tail and rudder in such a way that they can both work together to provide the aircraft with directional stability. It is also important to account for possible adverse and uncontrollable environmental conditions when designing the vertical tail and rudder; this means that the yawing moment curve should allow for stability even under crosswind conditions, spin rotation, asymmetric power rotation, and any other factors that may create sideslip angles. The total directional stability coefficient can be multiplied by flight and plane parameters to get a total restorative yawing moment that can be produced by the aircraft.

## Citations

1. Yechout, T. R., Morris, S. L., Bossert, D. E., and Hallgren, W. F., Introduction to aircraft flight mechanics: Performance, static stability, dynamic stability, 
   and classical feedback control, Reston, VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2003. 
